---
title: 'Building Activity Pub: Part 1'
date: '2022-11-25'
category: ['Project', 'Dev']
type: 'Article'
draft: true
---

# Building Activity Pub: Part 1

## 1. Motivation

So [mastodon](https://joinmastodon.org) has been in the news a lot lately due to some pretty entertaining upheavals/controversies with [twitter](http://twitter.com)!

Anything which makes people move out of walled gardens, and into the open, decentralised internet is, in my opinion, a good thing. So regardless of _why_ people are leaving twitter, this moment in time presents an opportunity for people to reclaim social networks. If, as Musk claims, [Twitter is a public town square](https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/1507777261654605828?s=20&t=aHeVaXOzvu9EweLi7Td0UA), then it really has no business belonging to a private entity.

Enter [ActivityPub](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub) a protocol for a federated social network (more on what this means at some later point in time). Currently, there are only a [handful of applications](https://fediverse.party) that implement ActivityPub in some capacity. Specifically, there are only 2-4 that implement a status/twitter-like version of ActivityPub (Mastodon, Friendica, and Pleroma are the main ones), with Mastodon being the largest. 

One thing that was made clear with the email protocols (IMAP, SMTP), is that if any single or few providers become too large, it creates fiefdoms which start breaking the interoperable aspects of the protocol. Now, that doesn't seem to be too big an issue with Mastodon, since the single largest instance only boasts about 200k users, and has closed sign ups - but part of a healthy ecosystem is diversity. With protocols, diversity of implementations means no single implementation can unilaterally dictate the development of the protocol (Google Chrome and chromium are a clear example of what happens when there is __one__ dominant implementation of a protocol).

Which sets the scene nicely for this little project - a series of articles detailing how to implement an ActivityPub server and client in JavaScript (well, TypeScript really, but 🤷).

## 2. Implementation

### 2.1 Set up
Lets whizz past the boring technological choices and set up of the dev environment:

1. install the dev dependencies: `npm install -D @types/node @types/express typescript @swc/core @swc/helpers regenerator-runtime nodemon prisma ts-node @types/cors`
2. install the other dependencies: `npm install express @prisma/client cors body-parser`
3. create the `tsconfig.json` file with the following:
```TypeScript
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "sourceMap": true,
    "outDir": "dist",
    "strict": true,
    "lib": ["esnext"],
    "esModuleInterop": true,
    "strictNullChecks": true
  }
}
```
4. create a dev script in `package.json` that reads: `"dev": "nodemon ./main.ts`

And we're ready to roll!

### 2.2 The shape of the server

Following the [ActivityPub #collections spec](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/#collections), a server:
- has an Actor end point which serves up an [Actor object](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-vocabulary/#actor-types).
- which **MUST** make discoverable the following collections endpoints: Inbox, Outbox
- and **SHOULD** make discoverable the following collections **endpoints**: Followers, Following, 
- and **MAY** make discoverable the following collections endpoints: Liked, Public, Likes, Shares


First, our directory structure:

```
|- main.ts
|- routes/
  |- index.ts
  |- actor / index.ts
```

Then lets create our actor route:
```TypeScript
// File: /routes/actor/index.ts
import { Router } from 'express';
export const actorRouter = Router();
```

... export it from our `routes/index.ts` file
```TypeScript
// File: /routes/index.ts
import { actorRouter } from './actor';

export const routes = {
  actor: actorRouter,
};
```

and import it into our `main.ts` file:
```TypeScript
// File: ./main.ts
import express from 'express';
import bodyParser from 'body-parser';
import cors from 'cors';
import { actorRouter } from './routes/actor';
const app = express();
const port = process.env.PORT || 3000;

app.use(bodyParser.json({ type: 'application/activity+json' }));
app.use(bodyParser.urlencoded({ extended: true }));

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  res.status(200).send('Hello');
});

app.use('/actor', cors(), actorRouter);

app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`Server is running at http://localhost:${port}`);
});
```

### 2.3 The Outbox

The responds to two types of HTTP requests: `POST` and `GET`. The `POST` request is for the actor (owner) of the inbox to broadcast or send things with, whereas the `GET` is for anyone to see what the actor has created.

Receiving a `POST` request to the actor's outbox should have two main side effects:
1. persist the **object** in some sort of data store
2. `POST` the object to the inbox or sharedInbox of any other actor defined in the `to` `cc` `bcc` `target` `inReplyTo` `tag` or `audience` properties.

In order to implement this, we need some means of serialising and de-serialising ActivityStreams. For that we'll reach for the `jsonld` library: `npm install jsonld && npm install -D @types/jsonld`